# Mastering Data Modeling

### John Carlis, Joseph Maguire

## Ch. 1

----

### Introduction

This book will help me become a **master at creating data models** - diagrammitic and textual expressions of the kinds of data that an organization, a business, or a culture consideres worth remembering.

A software system should help people do work, Work with data. ex:

- Remembering things
- Calculating things
- Displaying things

We're focusing on how sofware can improve the **storage**, **manipulation**, and **display** of **data**.

Questions remain.

**Who gets helped?**  
Does the system help everyone equally or do some workloads increrease while others decrease?

**When do people get helped?**  
Does the system pay dividends immediately or does it take time to pay off? Ex: years of data entry to be usable.

Not referring to the learning curve

**What constitutes help?**  
Should the system make work easier, faster more reliable or secure?

To answer these questions, use the economic principal: *Do what's worth doing*. If a systems *cost* outweights it's *benefits* it's not worth doing. This sounds easy however is difficult for several reasons. 

- Work is complex.  
Hard to quantify the cost of the work or value of improvements.
- Software is complex  
The software complexity stems from both the complexity of the work and the technology. Almost impossible to know in advance how much effort or cost it will take. The effort can be approximitely estimated however.

Chosing to do the rpojects is all about decision making. The team decides what is worth doing. Deciding that really comes down to this, decidding where to shift the burden of work. **_(??)_**

In the broadest sense, the following components are in any system:

- **Data Storage**--e.g., a DBMS or file-based system
- **Data processing**--e.g., implemented algorithms that create and manipulate data
- **Data input and display**--e.g., human/computer interfaces for entering and reading data
- **System documentation**--instruction guides for writing and understanding the automated system
- **Business documentation**--policy and procedure manuals for the organization.
- **Users**--human beings who interact with the system through the human/computer interface

The burden of remembering a particular piece of informationcan be imposed on any of these componenets. Ex: it might b ereasonable to allow users to shoulder the burden of remembring what a simple boolean means in relation to the field, it is not reasonalbel to amke them remember what complex relationsihps will mean.

If data changes frequently (hourly) it would be foolish to retain an hard copy or in software tha needs to be compiles. In such situations storing data electroniclly seems best. If there is little data only used by one person, storing the dat in a DB seems wasteful.

